**How Proximity to the Coast and Upwelling Regions Impacts Productivity in Marine Systems**
*Question*
	The question of this analysis is to determine if proximity to the coast or proximity to upwelling zones plays a larger role in influencing primary productivity in marine systems.
*Context*
	According to conventional wisdom, the more fertilizer plants or algae are given, the more they will grow and photosynthesize.  With algae, this is characterized by the Redfield ratio which describes the ratio in which the organisms need nutrients in order to grow and reproduce.  This ratio is usually represented in C:N:P in a ratio of 106:16:1.  However, in parts of the ocean, there are large areas where there is a high concentration of bioavailable nitrogen and phosphorous but there is very little productivity.  These are known as high nutrient low chlorophyll (HNLC) areas.  It is widely believed that in these areas of the ocean, Fe is the limiting factor.  When all nutrients spread out into the ocean, they will decrease as they get further away from the shore as they are up taken by producers.  However, Fe doesn’t only decrease in concentration because it is up taken by producers but also because when it reacts with oxygen in the water column it drops out of solution as rust.  Furthermore, other nutrients that have been re-mineralized will return to the surface in upwelling zones of the ocean.  However, this would again do less to alleviate Fe limitation than it would other nutrients because it already dropped out of solution as a bio unavailable form.  

*Methods*
*Data collection*
             The data used for this analysis is the surface concentration of chlorophyll a across the worlds’ oceans.  This data was obtained from the SeaWiFS (Sea-viewing wide field sensor) satellite.  The satellite is equipped with a spectrometer that can measure the wavelength of light in its field of view.  It uses the wavelengths at which chlorophyll a reflects visible light; a value that is known as the reflectance (R).  The chlorophyll concentration at the surface of the ocean is determined by the formula [chl] = antilog(.366-3.067R-1.93R^2+.64R^3-1.53R^4).  The data is then sent back to earth where each frame is stored as a value in a string of values.  Accompanying the [chl] data, the coordinate information for that location is stored so the chlorophyll data can analyzed to determine what biogeochmical factors influence productivity.
*Objectives*
         The purpose of the [original publication](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.4319/lo.1997.42.1.0001/abstract) was to determine how accurate existing models are for predicting the rates and distribution of productivity in the world’s oceans.  There are many pre-existing models that predict the rates at which photosynthesis will occur across the world’s oceans.  Based on how algae grow in controlled laboratory settings, there are a number of existing models based on factors such as temperature, light, nutrient availability, turbidity of the water ect.  The main focus of the authors that obtained and organized the data from the Nasa database was to look at how climatological factors impact the vertical profile of marine carbon fixation.  The data used for this analysis was stored [here](https:\\instaar.colorado.edu\~lovendus\OBGC\chl.mat).
*Analysis*
        To analyze the data, I used matlab to determine how both the distance from the coast and the distance from the upwelling areas impacted productivity on the worlds’ oceans.  The data was stored in a 2048*4096 array with each value being a concentration of chlorophyll.  To analyze it, I first made a latitudinal and longitudinal grid with the appropriate coordinates.  Then I ran it through a function that determined the distance from the coast in meters.  Form there I linearized the chlorophyll data and sorted it from least to greatest.  Using the index function, I was able to store the original indexes and after linearizing the distance array, I compared the two sets and generated a plot of the data.  After determining what kind of relationship the data sets had (inverse), I calculated the constant that the distance was divided by to determine the relationship.  I then plotted the expected chlorophyll concentration based on the distance from the coast.  Finally, I used a loop to determine the percent in chlorophyll concentration from the predicted and plotted where it was more and less different from the expected concentration 
*Results and Conclusion*
         When the relationship between the distance and concentration was calculated, it appeared to be an inversely proportional relationship.  [Figure 1](CompBioHomeworkAndLabs/Assignment_11/Figure1.jpg) illustrates the relationship observed and the constant the distance was devided by to determine the chlorophyll conentration was 1.783x10^5.  When the distance from the upwelling zones was plotted a linear but more eclectic relationship was observed as illustrated in [figure 2](CompBioHomeworkAndLabs/Assignment_11/Figure2.jpg) (showing the relationship in the northern hemisphere because the southern was too eclectic).  The formula for the relationship between the concentration of chlorophyll and the coast was calculated to be (by the polyfit() command) to be -.00017113(distance) + 1.0622.  But the when plotted against the distance from the upwelling vs the distance from the coast, there is a much more eclectic relationship.  To look at how the upwelling zones and the proximity to the coast impact productivity, a map was made [figure3](CompBioHomeworkAndLabs/Assignment_11/Figure3.jpg) illustrating where the concentration of chlorophyll is more similar and 
different to what is expected based on the proximity to the coast alone.  The actual concentrations of chlrophyll are much higher than what is expected in the upwelling zones such as those in the Bearing Sea, the North Atlantic and the Southern Ocean.  On top of that, there are areas where it is far lower than what would be expected based on the difference, but these are mostly located around Islands such as Hawaii.  Because the load coast function in matlab will load all coastal data including major island chains, it would cause such artifacts to materialize on the map.  Because they are not as large as continents, they wouldn’t have the same impact that the continents would in terms of imputing Fe, but because the function used is based off the distance from the coast, matlab wouldn’t have taken  his into account.  To get a more accurate sense of how Fe impacts productivity in the oceans, a future course of action would be to do a similar study and include models that predict the various methods of Fe      propagation into the ocean. 
 
